---
layout: default
title: SIFT
long_title: SIFT
parent: SIFT
grand_parent: Plugins
---
Anderson BDO, Moore JB (1979) Optimal Filtering. Englewood Cliff, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Arranz MA Portmanteau Test Statistics in Time Series.
packages.tol-project.org Available at:
<http://packages.tol-project.org/docs/ndmtest.pdf>.

Astolfi L, Cincotti F, Mattia D, Marciani MG, Baccala L a, Vico Fallani
F de, Salinari S, Ursino M, Zavaglia M, Ding L, Edgar JC, Miller G a, He
B, Babiloni F (2007)


Comparison of different cortical connectivity estimators for
high-resolution EEG recordings. Human brain mapping 28:143-57

Baccalá LA, Sameshima K (2001) Partial directed coherence: a new concept
in neural structure determination. Biological cybernetics 84:463-74

Baccalá LA, Sameshima K (2007) Generalized partial directed coherence In
Digital Signal Processing, 2007 15th International Conference on IEEE,
p. 163–166.

Barone P (1987) A method for generating independent realizations of a
multivariate normal stationary and invertible ARMA(p,q) process. J.
Statist. Comput. Simulat. 8:273-83

Bell AJ, Sejnowski TJ (1995) An information-maximization approach to
blind separation and blind deconvolution. Neural computation 7:1129–1159

Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate: a
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society.


Series B (Methodological) 57:289–300

Blinowska K, Kaminski M (2006) Multivariate Signal Analysis by
Parametric Models In B. Schelter, M. Winterhalder, & J. Timmer, eds.
Handbook of Time Series


Analysis Wiley, Wienheim.

Bressler SL, Richter CG, Chen Y, Ding M (2007) Cortical functional
network organization from autoregressive modeling of local field
potential oscillations.


Statistics in medicine 26:3875–3885

Bressler SL, Seth AK (2010) Wiener-Granger Causality: A well established
methodology. NeuroImage

Brillinger DR (2001) Time series: data analysis and theory. SIAM.

Bullmore E, Sporns O (2009) Complex brain networks: graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional systems. Nature reviews.
Neuroscience 10:186-98

Burg JP (1967) Maximum entropy spectral analysis In 37th Ann. Int.
Meet., Soc. Explor.Geophys. Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Burg JP (1975) Maximum entropy spectral analysis. Stanford, CA, USA:
Stanford University Press.

Buzsaki G (2006) Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, USA.

Chatfield C (1989) The Analysis of Time Series: An Introduction 4th ed.
Chapman & Hall.

Chen Y, Bressler SL, Ding M (2006) Frequency decomposition of
conditional Granger causality and application to multivariate neural
field potential data. Journal of


neuroscience methods 150:228-37

Deshpande G, LaConte S, James GA, Peltier S, Hu X (2009)(a) Multivariate
Granger causality analysis of fMRI data. Human brain mapping 30:1361-73

Deshpande G, Sathian K, Hu X (2009)(b) Effect of hemodynamic variability
on Granger causality analysis of fMRI. NeuroImage

Dhamala M, Rangarajan G, Ding M (2008) Analyzing information flow in
brain networks with nonparametric Granger causality. NeuroImage
41:354-62

Ding MZ, Bressler SL, Yang WM, Liang HL (2000)(a) Short-window spectral
analysis of cortical event- related potentials by adaptive multivariate
autoregressive


modeling: Data preprocessing, model validation, and variability
assessment. Biological Cybernetics 83:35-45

Ding M, Bressler SL, Yang W, Liang H (2000)(b) Short-window spectral
analysis of cortical event-related potentials by adaptive multivariate
autoregressive


modeling: data preprocessing, model validation, and variability
assessment. Biol. Cybern. 83:35-45

Ding M, Chen Y, Bressler SL (2006) Granger causality: Basic theory and
application to neuroscience In B. Schelter, M. Winterhalder, & J.
Timmer, eds. Handbook


of Time Series Analysis Wiley, Wienheim.

Efron B, Tibshirani RJ (1994) An Introduction to the Bootstrap:
Monographs on Statistics & Applied Probability. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Eichler M (2006)(a) Graphical Modeling of Dynamic Relationships in
Multivariate Time Series In B. Schelter, M. Winterhalder, & J. Timmer,
eds. Handbook of Time


Series Analysis Wiley, Wienheim.

Eichler M (2006)(b) On the evaluation of information flow in
multivariate systems by the directed transfer function. Biological
cybernetics 94:469-82

Fitzgibbon SP, Powers DMW, Pope KJ, Clark CR (2007) Removal of EEG noise
and artifact using blind source separation. Journal of clinical
neurophysiology :


official publication of the American

Electroencephalographic Society 24:232-43

Florian G, Pfurtscheller G (1995) Dynamic spectral analysis of
event-related EEG data. Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology 95:393–396

Florin E, Gross J, Pfeifer J, Fink GR, Timmermann L (2010) The effect of
filtering on Granger causality based multivariate causality measures.
NeuroImage


50:577-88

Geweke J (1982) Measurement of linear dependence and feedback between
multiple time series. Journal of the American Statistical Association
77:304–313

Granger CWJ (1969) Investigating causal relations by econometric models
and cross-spectral methods. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
Society


37:424-438

Haufe S, Tomioka R, Nolte G (2010) Modeling sparse connectivity between
underlying brain sources for EEG/MEG. Biomedical Engineering:1-10

Holroyd CB, Coles MGH (2002) The Neural Basis of Human Error Processing:
Reinforcement Learning, Dopamine, and the Error-Related Negativity.


Psychological Review 109:679 -709

Hui HB, Leahy RM (2006) Linearly Constrained MEG Beamformers for MVAR
Modeling of Cortical Interactions In 3rd IEEE International Symposium on


Biomedical Imaging: Macro to Nano IEEE, p. 237-240.

Jansen BH, Bourne JR, Ward JW (1981) Autoregressive estimation of short
segment spectra for computerized EEG analysis. IEEE transactions on
bio-medical


engineering 28:630-8

Kaminski M (1997) Multichannel Data Analysis in Biomedical Research In
Understanding Complex Systems, Handbook of Brain Connectivity series


Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, p. 327-355.

Kaminski M, Ding M, Truccolo WA, Bressler SL (2001) Evaluating causal
relations in neural systems: Granger causality, directed transfer
function and statistical


assessment of significance. Biological Cybernetics 85:145–157

Kaminski M, Blinowska K (1991) A New Method of the description of the
information flow in the brain structures. Biological Cybernetics
65:203–210

Kenet T, Arieli A, Tsodyks M, Grinvald A (2005) Are Single Cortical
Neurons Soloists or Are They Obedient Members of a Huge Orchestra? In J.
L. van Hemmen &


T. J. Sejnowski, eds. 23 Problems in Systems Neuroscience Oxford
University Press, USA.

Korzeniewska A (2003) Determination of information flow direction among
brain structures by a modified directed transfer function (dDTF) method.
Journal of


Neuroscience Methods 125:195-207

Korzeniewska A, Crainiceanu M, Kus R, Franaszczuk P, Crone N (2008)
Dynamics of Event-Related Causality in Brain Electrical Activity. Human
brain mapping


29:1170–1192

Luu P, Tucker DM, Makeig S (2004) Frontal midline theta and the
error-related negativity: neurophysiological mechanisms of action
regulation. Clinical


neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of
Clinical Neurophysiology 15:1821-35

Lütkepohl H (2006) New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis.
Berlin, Germany: Springer.

Marple S (1987) Digital Spectral Analysis with Applications. Englewood
Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Michel CM, Murray MM, Lantz G, Gonzalez S, Spinelli L, Grave De Peralta
R (2004) EEG source imaging. Clinical Neurophysiology 115:2195–2222

Mognon A, Jovicich J, Bruzzone L, Buiatti M (2010) ADJUST: An automatic
EEG artifact detector based on the joint use of spatial and temporal
features.


Psychophysiology:1-12

Mullen, T., Delorme, A., Kothe, C., Makeig, S (2010) An
Electrophysiological Information Flow Toolbox for EEGLAB. Society for
Neuroscience 2010, San Diego, CA

Neumaier A, Schneider T (2001) Estimation of parameters and eigenmodes
of multivariate autoregressive models. ACM Transactions on Mathematical
Software


(TOMS) 27:27–57

Nolte G, Bai O, Wheaton L, Mari Z, Vorbach S, Hallett M (2004)
Identifying true brain interaction from EEG data using the imaginary
part of coherency. Clinical


neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of
Clinical Neurophysiology 115:2292-307

Onton J, Makeig S (2009) High-frequency Broadband Modulations of
Electroencephalographic Spectra. Frontiers in human neuroscience 3:61

Pearl J (2000) Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge
University Press.

Pearl J (2009) Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference 2nd ed. New
York, New York, USA: Cambridge University Press.

Pereda E, Quiroga RQ, Bhattacharya J (2005) Nonlinear multivariate
analysis of neurophysiological signals. Progress in neurobiology 77:1-37

Roger C, Bénar CG, Vidal F, Hasbroucq T, Burle B (2010) Rostral
Cingulate Zone and correct response monitoring: ICA and source
localization evidences for the


unicity of correct- and error-negativities. NeuroImage 51:391-403

Schelter B, Winterhalder M, Eichler M, Peifer M, Hellwig B, Guschlbauer
B, Lucking CH, Dahlhaus R, Timmer J (2005)(a) Testing for directed
influences among


neural signals using partial directed coherence. J. Neurosci. Methods
152:210-219

Schelter B, Winterhalder M, Timmer J eds. (2006) Handbook of Time Series
Analysis: Recent Theoretical Developments and Applications 1st ed.
Wiley.

Schelter B, Timmer J, Eichler M (2009) Assessing the strength of
directed influences among neural signals using renormalized partial
directed coherence. Journal


of neuroscience methods 179:121-30

Schelter B, Winterhalder M, Eichler M, Peifer M, Hellwig B, Guschlbauer
B, Lücking CH, Dahlhaus R, Timmer J (2005)(b) Testing for directed
influences among


neural signals using partial directed coherence. Journal of neuroscience
methods 152:210-9

Schlögl A (2000) The electroencephalogram and the adaptive
autoregressive model: theory and applications. Doctoral Thesis.

Schlögl A (2006) A comparison of multivariate autoregressive estimators.
Signal processing 86:2426-2429

Schlögl A, Supp G (2006) Analyzing event-related EEG data with
multivariate autoregressive parameters. Progress in brain research
159:135–147

Schneider T, Neumaier A (2001) Algorithm 808: ARfit---a matlab package
for the estimation of parameters and eigenmodes of multivariate
autoregressive models.


ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 27:58-65

Seth AK (2005) Causal connectivity of evolved neural networks during
behavior. Network (Bristol, England) 16:35-54

Seth AK (2010) A MATLAB toolbox for Granger causal connectivity
analysis. Journal of neuroscience methods 186:262-73

Sommerlade L, Henschel K, Wohlmuth J, Jachan M, Amtage F, Hellwig B,
Lucking CH, Timmer J, Schelter B (2009) Time-variant estimation of
directed influences


during Parkinsonian tremor. Journal of Physiology-Paris

Supp GG, Schlögl A, Trujillo-Barreto N, Muller MM, Gruber T (2007)
Directed Cortical Information Flow during Human Object Recognition:
Analyzing Induced EEG


Gamma-Band Responses in Brain’s Source Space. PLoS One 2:684

Theiler J (1992) Testing for nonlinearity in time series: the method of
surrogate data. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 58:77-94

Valdés-Sosa P a, Sánchez-Bornot JM, Lage-Castellanos A, Vega-Hernández
M, Bosch-Bayard J, Melie-García L, Canales-Rodríguez E (2005) Estimating
brain


functional connectivity with sparse multivariate autoregression.
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences 360:969-81

Wang X, Chen Y, Bressler SL, Ding M (2007) Granger Causality Between
Multiple Interdependent Neurobiological Time Series: Blockwise Versus
Pairwise


Methods. International Journal of Neural Systems 17:71

Wang X, Chen Y, Ding M (2008) Estimating Granger causality after
stimulus onset: a cautionary note. NeuroImage 41:767-76

Weiner N (1956) The Theory of Prediction In E. F. Beckenbach, ed. Modern
Mathematics for Engineers New York, New York, USA: McGraw-Hill.

Yordanova J, Falkenstein M, Hohnsbein J, Kolev V (2004) Parallel systems
of error processing in the brain. NeuroImage 22:590-602

Zetterberg LH (1969) Estimation of Parameters for a Linear Difference
Equation with Application to EEG Analysis. Mathematical Biosciences
5:227–275
